In this video, I’m going to
explore additional features
for nested classes and enums.
Both can get very
complex very quickly.
So, we need a new class in
our Fundamentals project.
So, we'll call this one OuterMost.
I’ll paste the code in.
All right, so in this code, I’ve
created an enclosing class named
OuterMost, and you can see that's
got four inner classes one with
each type of access modifier.
So, the first inner class member there
is public inner, that demonstrates
two different ways to access the
enclosing instances field,
which it's got access to even though
it's declared private on line 9.
And you can see line 19 and the
line 22 demonstrating that, and
you can see the other inner class
members there, PackageInner with
a constructor ProtectedInner and
private as I have said with, we've
basically created it with the four
different access modifiers, right?
So, moving on down, we've got
another class down here - class
InnerClassExtras and that's just
instantiating a local variable of the
outermost class, it's instantiating
local variables for each of the
non-private innermost classes
using the outermost new.construct.
You can see the examples of
that online 61, 64, and 67.
Remember you can't access an inner
class without first having an object
reference to the enclosing class.
All right, so let's run
and check the output.
And what I’ll do is, I’ll just comment
that error out from the last video.
We might close down
some other windows here.
All right, so let's run.
And there's the output on screen.
So far so good, but let's
take it a step further.
What we're going to do is close down the
run window, and we are going back up to
our public inner class.
That's this one here, the public
inner class just before the
closing right curly brace here,
I’m going to add this code.
So, I’m nesting this class
inside the public inner class.
Again, you can see that.
You can see our public inner
class definition of line 12, and
I’ve pasted the code in there,
so this inner class that I’ve
pasted in is now two levels deep.
So, what I’m trying to demonstrate
is accessing a field on the
immediately enclosing class,
public inner.InnerString.
And you can see that the
lines 39 and also lines 43.
But as well, we're accessing a field
on the outermost enclosing class,
the OuterMost.OuterString, that's now
from a class nested several layers in.
We can see OuterString
there on lines 31 and 35.
So, let's add some code in our
main method to actually test this.
I am just going to add it to
the bottom of our main method.
You can see that I’m creating a
local variable for the more nested
inner class using the previous
local variable public inner
that we've defined previously.
You can see public
inner there on line 84.
Run this,
and we can see that's working, accessing
class two levels deep.
So, that's one way of doing it,
there's another alternative.
Let's paste in some code for that.
You can see that the alternative
is chaining instantiations outer to
inner, and you can see the code on
screen there, and let's run that.
We can see that also works as well.
All right, so next what I
want to do is extend a class
that has inner classes.
To do that, we need to create a new
class, let's go ahead and do that.
We'll call this one TestInheritance.
All right, let's paste in the code.
You can see what I’ve done there.
We've got a class test inheritance,
which now extends the outermost
class which has the usual main
method as you can see, it's calling
a private non-static method test
inner class members, and as you
can see that method that's been
called there is instantiating two
of the outermost inner classes.
So, you can see there that you're
able to instantiate the inner
classes without the use of an object
reference from the non-static method.
The reason that works is that
the members of the outermost
class are accessible to the
current instance of the enclosing
class through inheritance.
Let's run that.
And we can see that that works.
Now, that's an alternative
to that what we can do.
I could have replaced this code here,
I’ll just paste it below, so that's
an alternative and I think it makes
it clearer because it's using this
to make it clear that the enclosing
class allows access to the inner
classes on the current instance.
Run that.
You can see we've just got
the code output duplicated,
which we would expect.
Now, what happens if I try
to instantiate these from the
static method main because
obviously, this is currently in
the test inner class members.
So, let's actually replace the
code that's in our main method.
You might have guessed
that this doesn't compile.
A static method has no this and
I stated that these calls are
shorthand for the this.newConstruct.
Let's undo that so the code
compiles and executes again.
And everything's back
to working again.
All right, next what we want
to do is add the code
I’m about to paste in to the method test
inner class members again.
I want to demonstrate that access
to the second level class still
requires you to instantiate
its enclosing class first.
So paste this code in,
you'll see what I mean.
You can see that the second
statement is a compiler error
- expected class or package.
Let's remove the second
package, the second line rather.
Code compiles and we can run it.
All right, now ask yourself
this question, can you
extend inner classes?
And if so, how do you do it?
So, let's change our definition,
our declaration rather on line 8
for our test inheritance class.
We'll change this and paste in the new
version, extending a different class.
Here, what I’m doing is attempting
to subclass the inner class
member of the outermost class.
Again, looking at the code,
outermost public inner is our inner class.
Now, the compiler is throwing an
error indicating you can't do this.
No enclosing instance of
type ‘OuterMost is in scope.
So, the issue is that an
instance of outermost needs to
exist to access public inner,
so I’m going to undo that and
it gets rid of all the errors.
Well, so let's add another class
to the code segment and what we're
going to do is make this a nested
class of the test inheritance class.
I’m going to add it right down
the bottom after the test in
a class method, and I’ll just
clean it up while I’m here.
All right, so that's the
class that I’ve added there.
So the inner class I’m adding
extends the inner class that was
inherited from the outermost class,
so obviously public inner is an
inner class from the outermost class.
No errors.
Let's add some code to test
this in our test in a class
members class, a method rather.
No errors.
So, looking at the output, I’ve
proved that you can extend any
inner class that your class
inherits from its parent, whether
if it's public or protected.
Now as an alternative to that if I
close down the output pane, I could
have changed the class declaration
on line 33, instead of extending
public inner, I could have just
changed that to outermost.PublicInner.
That's valid as well and that might
help those maintaining the code
in the future to understand the
location of the public inner class.
All right, so let's replace
this new extended inner
class that I’ve got here.
So, you can see what I’ve done
there, I’ve got the inner class
on line 33, extending the inner
class that was inherited from the
outermost class, nothing different
there, but I’ve also got an inner
class extending further that extends
OuterMost.PublicInner.NestedInnerSecondLevel.
That's that second inner level class
that we created in OuterMost.java.
All right, so let's run this.
And everything still works, we get
the output on the last line there.
All right, so this has been a
long video and in the code in this
video, I’ve talked about the inner
class member in detail showing you
alternate methods to access inner
classes from enclosing code, and
external code, as well as extending
classes that contain inner classes.
And in addition, I gave you
some alternate methods to access
the enclosing instances fields.
So, let's end the video here.
And in the next one, let's
start talking about the
term effectively final.
See you in the next video.